I'm declaring a public health emergency
of international concern over the global
outbreak of novel coronavirus these kind
of things which will help you sanitize
they are flying off the shelf breaking
news tonight the number Rhona virus
cases in the u.s. nearly doubles as new
cases spread nationwide health officials
are warning all Americans to be prepared
you have to start taking seriously what
you can do now bottom line it's going to
get worse hello everyone I'm dr. John
Torres in New York this is an NBC News
now special report coronavirus crisis
your questions answered and that's
exactly what we'll be doing over the
course of this next hour now there are a
lot of unknowns surrounding this virus
but one thing is certain it has become
one of the most disruptive outbreaks in
recent times and so tonight we're going
to do our best to help you keep calm and
carry on as best you can with sound
advice on how to protect your health and
financial well-being to help me do that
we have assembled a team of medical
experts dr. Natalie a czar is our NBC
News medical contributor and dr. Shilpa
Patel is a pediatrician so we're gonna
start off with some questions here a lot
of questions that people have well the
most common ones is what can they do
doctor a czar to avoid coronavirus what
are you telling people about how it
spreads so John what we know about this
virus is that the predominant way it's
spreading between people is through
respiratory droplets so that means that
when an infected person coughs or
sneezes or breathes heavily the virus
attaches to that respiratory droplet it
travels about three to six feet and
that's where it can infect somebody else
if the other person were to then inhale
that or somehow get it on them and get
it in their nose or get it in their eyes
lots of questions people have about how
long it can last on surfaces and what
about that mode of transmission
experts say the predominant mode is
through respiratory droplets yes there
are of course going to be cases of
transmission when you've touched
something that that happens to Harvard
the virus but it's less likely than with
respiratory droplet transmission
we saw on the graphic there they say the
6 feet distance is what you want to keep
why 6 feet so we think at the moment and
this is a really important distinction
between a virus that travels on a
heavier respiratory droplet if it
doesn't hit anything at 6 feet or by 6
feet experts think that it just drops
and hits the floor
unlike measles let's say which can hang
out in the air and survive on dust for
even two hours that's more airborne than
the drug intoxication that comes that
term airborne which is a little bit
misleading because you think if it's
going through the air it must be
airborne but to be airborne it means
that it needs to be able to be suspended
in air for a period of time so that the
infected person could walk out of the
room but their germs are still hanging
around it can infect people who walk in
an hour later let's say that doesn't
happen with this virus as far as we know
and that's why that six feet is such an
important important measurement that you
want to make sure you keep that distance
now dr. Patel you're a pediatrician you
do a lot with children obviously that's
your specialty you have some very young
very stressed patients out who are
worried about coronavirus what do you
tell them and what you specially tell
their parents about this so we're seeing
a lot of kids coming in where the
parents are saying they're so nervous
they're so anxious and it's because what
they're hearing at home what they're
hearing at school and they don't know
what to do so the American Academy of
Pediatrics has a wonderful website
called healthy children org and I would
recommend all the parents if they could
go on to that website and there is some
talking points on there for the kids
that we would recommend and the biggest
thing is in these sorts of instances you
know we need to let the children know
what's happening not in extreme detail
and also help them have some control
over what is going on what kind of
questions are they asking you so they're
just saying the kids are coming in very
anxious so what I would recommend is the
first thing is be very reassuring to the
kids and just kind of let them know that
the doctors and the researchers are
doing as much as they can to help us
second of all let the kids be in control
teach them and and how they can be in
control is teach them how to wash their
hands how to cough or sneeze part of
this is I see kits in the office all the
time where they hold their arm
up like this oh I'm coughing into my
elbow and that doesn't work because the
droplets go over below and they travel
the six feet so we need to teach them to
either put the elbow all the way up
against the mouth or into the sleeve or
my best suggestion is pull your shirt
and go into your shirt and that way
covers your nose in your mouth and is
only going up against your skin all
right the other thing is let's teach
them to wash really really well and then
the last thing is to get enough sleep so
when the kids are anxious what you'll
notice is they may be extra clingy they
may be cranky they may not be sleeping
well or they may be a little bit more
distractible if this is happening the
biggest thing I'm telling everybody
stick to your routine you know we're
living our lives and we have to continue
to live our lives let's stick to our
routines and just provide reassurance
and then the last thing would be just to
monitor the media watch what the kids
are watching on television if there is
something that's frightening don't let
them watch that or on social media or
computers and the older kids as they're
watching the news go over what's with
what's going on in the news and talk
about what they've heard so if there's
any misinformation or rumors we can fix
that so don't ignore the information
because they're getting it from
somewhere you wanna make sure they
understand it yes and they're getting it
from you because hopefully you have a
better grasp on it exactly then they do
or their friends do it and dr. days are
one of the biggest things we hear about
and you and I have heard about this
constantly that's answered a lot of
questions about it masks and gloves in
particular masks why is the the
recommendation not to wear masks out in
public
ok so first part of that answer John is
the two different masks that people are
talking about one is the surgical masks
and the other one is called the n95
particulate respirator the surgical
masks are the things that people can
just put on the easier to buy you buy
them at CVS you buy them on Amazon those
are really only recommended for people
who are symptomatic to act as a barrier
so when they're coughing or sneezing at
least there there is some sort of you
know fortress against those droplets
leaving that person if you are trying to
protect yourself from becoming infected
wearing a surgical mask will not do that
the viral particles will get through
that the n95 respirators on the other
hand the particulate respirators are
indicated for healthcare workers and by
the way they are not used in ISIL
they're also used in combination with
ice shields gloves and gowns they have
to be specially fitted and we're always
concerned of course about a looming you
know shortage of these so we are really
really strongly urging people not
regular folks not to wear it we've all
been sorry we've all been trained in n95
yeah has to be sized you take special
precautions when you're using them and
you don't use them all day long you can
switch them out you do and actually
because of the concern about shortages I
know that my Hospital has you know
different protocols for reusing and how
to do that just in the event that there
is a national shortage of them when it
comes to gloves I think they give people
a false reassurance that they are
protected if you have a glove on and you
still touch your face you still can
infect yourself all it does is just act
as a barrier to your skin so if you are
gonna be out in the out and about
wearing disposable gloves you have to do
just that and dispose of them very
regularly so I know a lot of people
think these are giving them extra
protection not necessarily and so
something the recommendations are not to
use them and I should probably follow
those recommendations but dr. Patel one
of the other things we tell people all
the time is you know be prepared but
don't panic what does that look like a
perhaps more importantly what does that
not look like so what it doesn't look
like is going to the store and buying
everything and buying the store out
please don't do that I know a lot of
people are buying water not just wheel
it to shoe Purell everything everybody
is buying everything out please don't
panic would be the the biggest point to
take home from this just a two-week
supply just in case if there is any
issues so you have enough for that but
that's it oh and don't make homemade
Purell can I please say that definitely
thank you this is that DIY solution
people talk about a lot of questions
about that yes why not make that so
because you know anything that's out on
the internet it's not something that's
safe to use there was just a case
recently where there was homemade Purell
and the boy burned his hands and we
don't want any issues coming out from
that and we don't want anybody getting
hurt and it might not make it well and
it might not have that 60 percent of
alcohol let's let's talk about symptoms
now there's a new study out that says
half of those infected will show
symptoms in about five days and almost
everyone will show symptoms by 12 days
now the CDC believes the vast majority
of people who contract a virus
only have mild symptoms Karl Goldman was
one of those people he got the virus
while he was on the diamond princess and
here's how he described his experience
without my fingers but I'm still stuck
in a while having to undergo three
separate tests 24 hours and he's a
gentleman greats
he's a gentleman in great spirits but
that patient others have said that the
flu is actually worse than Kovac 19 dr.
aids are is that what most people are
experiencing how's that possible you
think right yeah so so we're getting to
the number that you know 80% of people
are gonna have a mild to moderate
illness and I think he probably
represents
that all all the clinical information
that we're getting is done you know case
series here at case series there and
sort of putting painting a picture of
what this disease looks like and I found
one of the more recent case series to be
particularly and illuminating and that
they described the flu we all know is
that sort of stormy onset one day to the
next you feel really really sick achy
and high fever and that corona virus
seems to be a little bit more indolent
so that means that what does that mean
it means that you're starting with sort
of vaguer symptoms in the beginning that
dry cough fatigue malaise you know
achiness and then sort of it starts to
progress and I think that that probably
maybe reflect that that kovat that
koruna virus is sort of sieving the
upper respiratory tract and then the
folks who get really sick it starts to
make its way down into the lung and
that's when the shortness of breath and
respiratory distress really happens
later as you pointed out so really keep
an eye on on folks who are more
susceptible to getting sick and that's
one of the reasons that people with the
flu just feel like they basically can't
get out of bed I feel like it came on
very quickly this would not necessarily
is may not it may not exactly know the
elderly with underlying conditions are
especially at risk but dr. Patel I know
your own patients are a good example of
the different levels of risk what
profiles someone who's at a higher risk
what makes someone higher risk
especially in your practice so anybody
who's got heart issues lung issues
diabetes or their immunocompromised and
one of the big questions I get at
children in particular especially
children with asthma I've gotten that
question many many times are they
necessarily a higher risk with this you
know anybody who has asthma is look as a
higher risk for flu so I think any child
that has this the parents should just be
told you just take your necessary
precautions and wash don't touch your
face and if your child is sick please
call your pediatrician the other big
question I get a lot of times is do I
send my kids to school do I send my kids
to daycare what are you telling parents
so if your child has a fever no please
do not do not send them and you know
sometimes what the parents do is they
give Tylenol or motrin oh look you don't
have a fever anymore please do not do
this we are talking 24 hours without any
sort of Tylenol or motrin without a
fever then you are allowed to go back to
school so how about
other children that are healthy at the
should be sending them to school if the
school has said hey we're gonna close
down a lot of parents are getting upset
about that if the school closes down you
have to follow your school policies and
look the schools are very good they're
putting policies in place where they're
working on instruction from home through
the computers and so I think everybody
is going to be okay with us and if if
school says we're closing down to clean
that's fine let them clean and it's for
a purpose it is for a purpose very good
purpose in decades our people are also
watching their events rallies
conferences all these things are getting
cancer canceled they're wondering what
they should cancel if they should cancel
their own parties if they should cancel
the events they have with large groups
what do you think people should be doing
with their own things they're doing not
necessarily ones that are out there in
the public yeah you know what I think in
this case you really have to assess your
own individual risk you know you have to
sit there and say what it all damned I
you're asking yourself these questions
you know what's my age what are my other
underlying medical problems what's the
degree of viral activity in the
community are we seeing community spread
here or we see or we not seeing any
cases I think people also need to keep
in mind that this is not going to last
forever and that if the public health
officials are saying that at this point
to mitigate the impact of this epidemic
and now pandemic requires social
distancing that everyone just take a
step back and say you know what let's do
this differently for the next three to
six months however long it takes I mean
essentially the proverbial nipping it in
the bud because if we don't do that
that's really the only weapon we have
right now right we have no antivirals
that are prophylactic anyway and we have
no vaccine so all we can do is avoid
transmission what I've heard a good rule
of thumb is how much do you trust the
people who are coming to your event to
not come if they're sick well that's the
thing if you don't then obviously it's
not something you want to have and and
we don't know yet John but like I should
be saying dr. Torres yeah
you know how efficient that asymptomatic
transmission is you know it appears to
be less efficient than flu but we know
that it can happen so yeah we would love
it if we could trust people that if you
have a fever or cough you stay home but
we know that that a that might not
happen and that B people can you know
can transmit when they're not really
symptomatic executive let's talk
about one of the more confusing aspects
of this outbreak which is when to go to
the hospital or when to get tested well
here's what the head of Emergency
Preparedness at Boston's Mass General
said on that specific issue this is one
case where we have to all come together
as a society if everyone comes to the
medical system for evaluation even with
mild symptoms it overwhelms the medical
system we unfortunately did see this in
China we're gonna have to communicate
from health care system with Public
Health with everyone who takes part in
this response we're going to communicate
very carefully people need to know when
to go see the doctor when to go to the
emergency Fartman they also need to know
when it's safe for them to stay home and
that's hard when anxiety is as high as
it is right now
but it's an extremely important message
inductors are when is it appropriate for
people to go to the hospital and get
tested okay if you are having trouble
breathing chest pain intractable
intractable vomiting diarrhea high fever
you are going to seek medical attention
ideally you'll give your doc a call
ahead of time so that they can let the
emergency room know ahead of time so
that they can prepare to have you in
isolation this is where hospitals around
the country and medical offices across
the country are deploying their virtual
care I spent easily half of my day today
telling patients giving them the
information for our virtual urgent care
so that you could be triaged remotely if
you have mild symptoms you can stay at
home you can self isolate you can manage
this if you're otherwise healthy with
fluids and fever reducers but again
those four things chest pain shortness
of breath fever and not keeping you know
down liquids you do need to seek medical
attention don't be worried about that
and let's talk about that for a second
what do you do if someone in the house
has the virus and they need to be
isolated what does that mean home
isolation right so it's very different
than than home quarantine which is which
I think is an important thing for
viewers to understand quarantine is when
you're not sick but you've been exposed
and you're just gonna isolate we're
gonna isolate yourself for about 14 days
isolation is when you're actually sick
the recommendation and this is CDC
guidance is that if there is a sick
individual in the home with coronavirus
there should be a designated area in the
house that is just
for them a bedroom a suite whatever this
situation is only one person in the
household should be that person's
caretaker who's going in and out and
obviously practicing incredibly good
hand hygiene the whole time importantly
at this point if someone in your house
is in quarantine meaning let's say your
spouse or somebody has been exposed but
not having any symptoms you don't need
to be in quarantine also at the moment
we don't think that the contact of a
contact needs to also be in quarantine
if there's a lot of activity in the
community definitely reach out the
Department of Health if they feel
differently because there's you know we
know that it can spread in clusters in
families but for the most part again
somebody in quarantine you don't also
need to be in quarantine and isolated or
the sick person needs to be in their own
designated area and this is good for
adults because they'll follow the rules
essentially do what they wanted do what
we tell them to do or ask them to do it
but dr. Patel for children nice like
children to quarantine children in a
home that has to be difficult how do you
do that so you know thankfully we
actually haven't had in the majority of
the country to do this and yes there are
isolated areas and regions that we have
I mean at that point there's no choices
you're 14 days is 14 days but I don't
think that any of the children have
actually been seriously ill with a
corona virus which is not going very
thankfull how do you keep them in the
house how do you keep them in the room
come up with games you're gonna have to
do another big question we get which I
think we should answer is spring is
coming warm weather is coming and a lot
of people are saying you know that could
help contain this virus well here's what
dr. Anthony Fauci told members of
Congress just about this subject so even
though the concept that when warm
weather comes many respiratory viruses
diminish we have no guarantee at all
that this is going to happen with this
virus
we simply don't know what will happen
this virus and that's creating a sense
of fear so dr. Patel what's your message
to people about you know it's the same
thing that we've been talking about this
entire time just be super cautious wash
your hands don't touch your face and
live your life and you know let's look
for the experts to the guidance doctor
Falchi let's see what happens because as
this is evolving we're doing more
research and we're will eventually come
up with answers that yeah what I've sort
of tried to communicate to people is
that you have to find a place between
apathy and never leaving your house you
know neither extreme is really what
anybody is recommending I think people
need to stay informed they need to react
but not overreact and just you know as
dr. Patel said live your life daily and
and just you know keep your eyes and
ears open for any changing guidance I
think this is going to take the whole
nation coming together to get this under
control and hopefully under control
sooner rather than later but dr. Patel
and dr. azar thank you both for your
insight now one of the other questions
people keep asking is what can I do to
boost my immune system well we asked dr.
oz to look into it and here's what he
came up with where I can't do people we
like taking charge of life America has
always been able to mobilize because we
had a clear action plan so while
everyone's waiting for the government
and health care providers to fix health
care response to the coronavirus here's
some things that I would do if I were
you to help your immune system this is
true for all problems and including the
Carano virus so keep that in mind
first off breaking a sweat every day
does help it revs your immune system up
so you're ready to go to battle if you
were to get infected with the chronal
virus sleep is probably the single most
beneficial act we can take with regard
to lifestyle to make sure we were
prepared for the onslaught of a virus
and you want to get at least seven hours
a night didn't I know that's hard for
some folks but this is a good time to
focus on it I also think it's important
to start eating as clean as you can in
particular produce is especially
valuable cause it contains lots of
antioxidants and vitamins that are
generally beneficial for the body's
immune system it allows us to fight back
when necessary let me throw out some
ideas on supplements and all of these
are weakly beneficial there have been
sand
studies done of them that I feel
comfortable recommending it to my family
so I'll recommend it to you as well
vitamin D is probably the best
prophylactic vitamin you can take you go
out get some sunlight if you want but in
many parts of the country still a little
chilly so I think it's the vitamin d3 or
lait 400 international units probably a
reasonable dose makes sense if you do
feel coming down with an illness that
might be the chrono virus like you've
got a fever and fatigue maybe a hacking
cough that's dry then I'd encourage you
takes it might even see a little bit
morning bit up in the afternoon because
it washes out of your body pretty
quickly the zinc is also beneficial and
a higher dose that's made I want to take
it all the time but especially in that
case might be useful and then there are
a couple ideas like beta glucan which
comes from mushrooms and an elderberry
that have been used in some studies
again demonstrating a shortening of the
course of illness nothing is gonna make
or break your response but it'd be
beneficial have an election Mudge in the
right direction
in our thanks to dr. oz coming up how to
protect yourself from price gouging and
what to do if you worry about an
upcoming trip or our NBC news
correspondents have the answers right
after this you're watching NBC News now
you're watching NBC News now we've got
some breaking news this is the life shot
laughs good afternoon from this news
meet for your streaming world NBC news
now white terrorism and white
supremacist terrorism in this country
he's not some weird analogue to al-qaeda
or Isis it's not some foreign thing that
looks like something that we've been
fighting in the war on terror it's
actually fundamentally as American as
anything and it is an existential threat
to the multiracial and pluralistic equal
and open democracy that we have been
fighting for in this country since
people died on the battlefield in a
civil war everybody Steve Carnegie back
here at the big board it's more than
numbers these are the states that are
gonna win oh the field they're probably
gonna create a front-runner it's what
those numbers mean
ideologically you're seeing in this
first wait a very similar electorate to
what you saw in 2016 but age-wise this
is the big variable this is why we don't
allow Steve Kornacki to leave the
building this time of year nobody breaks
it down like Carnegie
need your true-crime fix on the go but
Dateline episodes are available as
podcasts mysteries with a twist from the
true crime original Wow listen to
Dateline wherever you get your podcasts
[Music]
you're watching NBC News now we've got
some breaking news this is the Lions got
laughing brought more to the caucuses
news meet for your streaming world live
tweet days 3:00 to 11:00 p.m. Eastern
something new from Meet the Press the
Chuck podcast and insiders take on
politics and more for some of my
favorite reporters get it for free
wherever you get your podcasts we've got
this fundamental thing about human
beings and we've got the way that we
constitute our politics and the danger
is that if our politics grow to tribal
they grow excessively tribal then we'll
lose this for the way of talking why is
this happening with chris hayes
subscribe now
[Music]
get anything from Las Vegas and chance
from Washington why should your judgment
be valued let's take my judgment against
anyone out there it's party unity your
concern right now or is simply winning
as many states as well it's both NBC
Nightly News with Lester Holt today
family get is so exciting to be here we
are serving up a today cafe special
we have just loved seeing your beautiful
shining faces how sweet is that
welcome back I'm dr. John Torres in New
York with our special report coronavirus
your questions answered I know that
beyond the medical concerns you have a
lot of practical questions about your
life and your wallet as well to answer
some of those let's bring in NBC News
senior business correspondent Stephanie
ruhle an NBC news investigative and
consumer correspondent Vicki Wynn
Stephanie let's start with you a lot of
people myself included worried about
their 401ks a stock markets been all
over the place it's taken a beating what
do you tell people to do I get it I
completely appreciate I understand why
people would be this stressed out when
you look at the markets this often it's
panic inducing now what this is though
this isn't a financial crisis it's not
the crisis that we were in a know ate
it's a public health crisis the real
issue though is this public health
crisis if it is not addressed in a in a
quicker in a quicker broader way then it
is going to turn into a financial crisis
if you look at the way the market is
responding to the president when the
president says yes we're going to do
something for small businesses and then
he continues to compare this to the flu
and can continue to say this is not a
big deal people should go to work
business leaders know business leaders
are taking draconian efforts to limit
the amount of exposure for their
consumers for their employees so when
you see that split that's when things
are starting to get really shaky in the
markets now for those of us that aren't
professional investors do not dive into
volatile waters at the rockiest times
but you definitely want to stay informed
at a time like this and if it is a year
when you're looking to retire I can't
say that I have great news for you but I
can say hang tight how concerns your
viewers be about the financer about this
health crisis turning into a financial
crisis like you were talking about is
because there's something I think and a
lot of people's minds right now it's
fair to say really concerned in 2008
when we did face the financial crisis
remember the charger secretary was Hank
Paulson the former CEO and chairman of
Goldman Sachs an expert in crisis
management and risk
management what we're looking at right
now the president isn't armed with
people like that around him
we know he's very angry with his Fed
chair we know that the Fed cut rates
last week and it didn't help anyone so
can I say no you shouldn't be worried
this could turn into a financial crisis
and we know certain sectors are bleeding
into recession already travel leisure
hospitality and forget the markets we
need to talk about the real economy
because we forgot about the real economy
after the financial crisis after the
financial crisis we kept looking at
markets and a few years later we said
banks are back autos are back weren't
good shape we weren't thinking about all
the people who lost their homes in the
subprime crisis this is a consumer-based
economy when we keep saying people
should work from home what do we say to
people in the service industry if you're
a barber if you're a hairdresser
you're a waiter yes maybe we're gonna
give small businesses and loans but if a
restaurant is empty tonight and it fills
up in a month still you're not going to
make up for all that money you lost
there's a real problem that our
consumers are going to face right now
for real Americans and the problem could
be that people living at or below the
poverty line are gonna suffer the worst
and that just keeps going on and
obviously if you're a construction
worker you can't work at home there's a
lot of jobs you can't work at home and
so it's gonna be interesting to see what
happens dr. John you were talking about
the importance to take this social space
be six feet apart when a homeless
shelter you sleep six inches apart
exactly so hopefully things smooth out a
little bit here but with corner but be
aware we're aware and we talk about it
well then maybe we can start to solve
for it one of my favorite things you
said actually earlier this week staff
was about going to your local nail salon
or supporting your local business
supporting your restaurants we're not
being told to stay on lockdown right now
we're just being told to practice good
hygiene and avoid large crowds
especially if we're 60 and above and
have underlying health conditions so for
the folks who don't fall into that
category it's okay to live your lives
and continue on it is a luxury to work
from home most people can't do that and
there's a big economy that relies on the
people that do work out in those service
sectors so we should be supporting them
and we'd like to ask people to try to
get a little creative let's say your
fitness center has virtual classes try
to do that because that fitness center
you love the teacher that you love if
nobody shows
for their class and they're not getting
paid and they're not gonna be there any
longer they're not gonna be there any
longer we get past this and we will I
know we want our communities to thrive
exactly and with chronic cases on the
rise demands for products to prevent the
spread is increasing that's creating a
major problem for consumers price
gouging so Vicky we're hearing people
feel like retailers are taking advantage
of the situation are we seeing price
gouging is it happening absolutely and
governments are taking zero-tolerance
policies on it one of the most egregious
cases I think that hit the headlines
this week was the 7-eleven owner in New
Jersey who put some homemade hand
sanitizer on the shelves someone bought
it sprayed it on some little boys and
they got chemical burns because this was
not an approved hand sanitizer it was
something made with commercial grade
cleansing fluids so we're seeing not
only price gouging we're also seeing
these homemade concoctions that people
can't trust so there are people who are
really trying to take advantage of
what's happening in this scenario $150
it is sickening under percent that is
sick
Jersey yes $150 for a bottle of Purell a
mask that normally sells for two bucks
$75 you don't have to go far look on any
online marketplace you will see those
sellers who are looking to capitalize
right now and you might notice in the
background here the cleaners you can see
them right there they're doing a great
job of keeping our building clean and
they've actually ramped up their efforts
over the last few days and they're gonna
continue to do that and I think that's
what most buildings are doing but the
question to you dr. John as parents were
saying I guess we should go out there
and get masks is that even a good idea
do they even work they work in the
medical profession they work in our
hospitals but they don't necessarily
work out in public and I think they give
people a false sense of security so
that's one of those things that number
one the we need them in the healthcare
environment let's take care of patients
because we're walking in and out of
these rooms and protect the patient and
ourselves and if people are using them
we're not going to have that supply and
so you have to be very very careful with
that and most recommendations are not to
use them and can we help us wage some of
the fears too because I think the human
tendency is I want that thing that I
can't get when I see the store shelves
empty of the wipes or the hands
tiser or what have you I feel like I
have to have it you brought up a great
point we didn't have hand sanitizer ten
years ago we had good old bar soap and
water and that is still the number one
gold standard for helping us to protect
ourselves
I guess question all the time what do I
do if I can't find hand sanitizers like
wash your hands and don't touch your
face touch your face until you wash your
hands it's very simple it's hard to
accept but that's truly if you can't get
your hands on a mask you don't need a
mask if you can't get you know
disinfectant wipes you don't need those
just wash your hands often and if you
can't don't touch your nose right your
mouth your eyes you could literally have
coronavirus on your fingers as long as
you don't touch your eyes nose or mouth
you're not going to get advice is the
same don't touch your face also think
about people for clearing out the
shelves of a grocery store or a Costco
hates do you know who can't do that the
people who are living paycheck to
paycheck so they might need that one
container of soap or that that Purell
they can't get it if there's none left
so be cognizant of all that we're taking
and even like things essential things
toilet paper if they could run out of
there we are doing this together and I
think about our neighbors that is this
is sort of the time where you have to
kind of look be prepared be ready take
some personal responsibility it's also a
good idea to look out for the folks that
live around you especially who might not
have access to the same resources that
you do and switching topics just a
little bit here people even if they want
to avoid getting sick or they're
quarantined there's another potential
disruption to our lives and that's where
we're getting a lot of questions about
travel plans about people going out and
about is my trip gonna get canceled if I
have one in the near future and people
be worried about that yeah well right
now as we know coronavirus has hit every
single continent except for Antarctica
and the CDC has issued serious travel
alert warnings for many countries so
this is a developing situation literally
changing hour by hour the best bet is to
continue to follow call your travel
agent or the airline that you're
traveling on to see what those updates
are that could be changing daily on the
flipside if you're healthy and you have
a trip planned this can be a fine time
to travel just if you can bring some
wipes to sanitize the area around you
the head the headrest you know the seat
belt buckles any surfaces that you're
gonna be touching on that flight don't
touch your face you'll be fine you'll
probably have the whole road yourself
if not the whole plane I mean we were
talking to someone who came back from a
North Carolina North Carolina flight 100
seats there were 20 seats taken on that
plane but I wouldn't assume if you want
to cancel you'll get a refund or get a
credit this is a time if you plan to
make if you want to make plans spend the
extra money and buy there a fundable
ticket don't assume if this gets worse
and there's more warnings you're gonna
be able to let it to get let out of that
trip
even with the trip insurance that might
not cover you it correct right
costs more there's something called CFR
insurance cancel for any reason
typically 60% more for the premium and
sometimes it only covers about 75% of
the non-refundable cost so this is a
time to read the fine print
it is not one size fits all across the
airlines or cruise lines don't make
assumptions you're right that's where
everyone gets in trouble but I will say
and give credit to the airlines who are
trying to be flexible who are really
trying to Goose the market and get
people back into the travel flow and
maybe by the summer things are going to
look very different and right now there
are some Screaming deals to be had on
round-trip tickets but read the fine
print make sure you understand what the
cancellation fees are and the change
fees are we might say I'm not calling it
a government bailout but specific
industries like the airline's you might
see the government step in and try to do
something and I don't believe we would
see the same kind of public outrage that
we saw in the financial crisis because
this is much more like a natural
disaster and the airlines to use some of
whom have already foregone their
salaries for the rest of the year are
trying to solve for this and it's not
just executives that they employ think
about it from the pilots to the flight
attendants down to baggage handlers it's
an entire industry think about all the
people you interface with when you go to
an airport
many of whom are low wage workers you're
going to consider all the jobs that are
impacted here that's a whole ecosystem
to try and get this under control and
try and where they say flatten out the
curve to try and not get it to spread
quite as quickly a lot of companies
urging employees to work from home in an
effort to help slow the spread of the
coronavirus but that's not necessarily
an option for everyone Stephanie what
can people do if they can't work from
home I mean that's the thing that we're
not even talking about that much what if
you were a carpenter there are many jobs
that
you can't we've got two million people
that work in trucking and ground
transportation and people in the gig
economy and if you think about those in
the gig economy they're not actually
employees of anyone they don't get
health care they're working as
independent contractors they don't get
all those benefits that's something that
the government is taking a very close
look at now and one of the reasons
there's not regulation or support these
are new businesses the gig economy
didn't exist five years ago so there
isn't necessarily regulation to support
those employees so at the very least
it's a positive that you are seeing the
government look at it and you're
actually seeing companies you're seeing
companies like Starbucks and lyft think
about their shift workers and say it's
time to give you paid leave Olive Garden
did the same thing when was the last
time you saw a restaurant and you could
only see it happen on a corporate
restaurant not a mom-and-pop you say
let's think about those employees and
what it means to them because they are
full-time workers I've been on both ends
of that spectrum where I've been the
employee who was told you know hey go
home and I have a corporation behind me
I've also been a small-business owner
there's a lot of pressure to have
workers stay at home but that's not
always gonna work for them I mean let me
just tell you it's also heartbreaking if
you're a small business owner and you
say you know what I'm a catering company
I've got to go to work today but lots of
your clients are canceling then what are
you going to do you have to send all
your cooks home you don't want to you
love to put them on leave but you're a
small business you don't have that
luxury
so I think we really have to consider
when we keep wringing our hands saying
well employers need to do this that and
the other thing not on employers are
mega giant corporations well thank you
guys so much for all this this has been
fantastic and I appreciate Stephanie and
Vicky thanks for being here and giving
you some information because we think
about the health aspects to this but we
also need to start thinking about the
financial aspects especially starts
lasting a whole lot longer nancial
health is part of your house it is part
of your health that is true now when we
come back we'll look into where
coronavirus came from and what that
tells us about what's next in the fight
against this disease you're watching NBC
News now
[Music]
you're watching NBC News now we've got
some breaking news this is the light lot
left
good afternoon from this news meet for
your streaming world
NBC News now today it's so exciting to
be here we are serving up a today cafe
special we have just love seeing your
beautiful shining faces how sweet is
that need your true crime fix on the go
Dateline episodes are available as
podcasts mysteries with a twist from the
true crime original Wow listen to
Dateline wherever you get your podcasts
[Music]
you're watching NBC News now we've got
some breaking news this is the Lions got
laughing brought more to the caucuses
news meet for your streaming world live
weekdays 3:00 to 11:00 p.m. Eastern
[Music]
we've got this fundamental thing about
human beings and then we've got the way
that we constitute our politics and the
danger is that if our politics grow to
tribal then we'll lose this sort of way
of talking why is this happening with
chris hayes subscribe now
[Music]
you're watching NBC News now special
report coronavirus crisis your questions
answered as more cases of kovat 19 or
tallied up you might be wondering what
comes next
NBC News technology correspondent Jacob
Ward went to one of the nation's leading
epidemiologist at UC Berkeley with
exactly that question
health officials agree that we are past
the point of containment we're not
stopping this thing and instead we're
into mitigation but one of the primary
concepts there is what's called
flattening the curve even if the same
number of people get the disease it's
better that that happened over a
prolonged period than all at once
because if you and I and everyone we
know get it right now that's gonna
create a peak of infection that's gonna
crash our healthcare system
if instead we have a long flat curve of
new infections that's something that
hospitals can deal with far more easily
UC Berkeley epidemiologist dr. art
Reingold specializes in who lives and
who dies during epidemics involving
respiratory infections so if you go back
to the polio epidemics of earlier days
or the flu pandemic of 1918 there are a
few examples of communities walling
themselves off and basically nobody
comes in from the outside who avoided
the epidemic if you will that's not so
easy to do if you're in a city there are
a few complexities to walling yourself
off in terms of food and other
necessities but in China
whole cities have been shut down cutting
off transmission here in the United
States there's almost no history of any
epidemic being checked by that kind of
action dr. Reingold is betting that herd
immunity is how this will end if we're
starting with a population where no one
is immune to this virus which is what we
assumed
which will basically drive down
transmission and prevent infection
through at least two ways one is
vaccination if and when we have a safe
and effective vaccine and the other is
that basically much of the population is
immune but we call that herd immunity
basically you get reduced circulation
because the virus just can't be
transmitted to people who would rather
do a vaccine but a vaccine is not going
to be here in time to allow us to do
that at least for 12 to 18 months and
even a 12 to 18 month time line is
considered fast tracking of vaccine
CNBC's make trail reports on
biotechnology and pharmaceuticals and
has more on the pipeline of vaccines and
other treatments well dr. Anthony Fauci
called America's doctor by a member of
Congress is leading the charge on
vaccine development in the u.s. he said
at least ten vaccines are in development
to try to prevent kovat 19 infection and
his program at the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases has
moved at a record pace getting it into
Phase one in a matter of months is the
quickest that anyone has ever done
literally in the history of xn ology
made by biotech company moderna the
first batch of the vaccine was delivered
for human testing in just 42 days but
starting human trials is just the
beginning the first stage phase one will
take three months to determine safety
Foudy said then another eight or so
months in Phase two to determine the
vaccine works to prevent the disease so
when you've heard me say we would not
have a vaccine that would even be ready
to start to deploy for a year to a year
and a half that is the time frame now
anyone who thinks they're going to vote
more quickly than that I believe will be
cutting corners that would be
detrimental why so long because unlike a
drug a vaccine is given to healthy
people so the risk tolerance is lower
than if a person is already sick and
needs to be treated drugs may move more
quickly both for that reason and because
some were already in
testing or approved for other diseases
among the most advanced an antiviral
drug from biotech giant Gilead called
REM de severe it was used to treat the
first patient in the US with kovat 19
with promising results published in the
New England Journal of Medicine but
experts note one patient is far too
little data to draw conclusions about
whether the drug works it's now being
tested in two clinical trials in China
another run by the NIH in the US and an
additional trials run by Gilead we're
gonna know probably by April whether
that drug works or not and that's
important because that's a drug that can
save lives if it works
another biotech company Regeneron plans
to test a drug for rheumatoid arthritis
to see if it could help tamp down
dangerous immune system flare-ups that
can happen to some patients with kovat
19 but it and others are also developing
new drugs as well where Jenner on aims
to have hundreds of thousands of doses
of a drug ready for human clinical
trials by late summer its approach could
both treat disease and potentially
prevent it in San Francisco startup veer
biotechnology has yet another approach
it's isolated antibodies from people who
recovered from SARS a disease caused by
a different corona virus the people who
get infected with a virus or another
infectious agent and recover often do so
because they make antibodies which are
proteins that circulate in the blood
that bind to the pathogen and block its
activity or block its ability to infect
cells vir chooses the optimal antibodies
and will test those for activity against
the new corona virus the company is also
working with the nih to identify
antibodies from survivors of kovat 19
vir CEO George skagos saying they hope
to know within a few months whether they
have an approach that could work but it
would still need to be tested in
clinical trials dr. John thanks Meg the
whole world may be watching and waiting
for a vaccine or for any medicine to
help treat coronavirus but there are
researchers working just as hard to find
out where kovat 19 actually came from
and here's NBC News chief foreign
correspondent Richard Engel in Singapore
with the likely culprit
dr. Anderson took me to another part of
the facility to show me where the virus
came from that's that's gathered in
China for food a vet here captured one
and didn't a containment cage she showed
it to me and why bats how confident are
you that the corona virus came from from
bats so I'm probably 90% confident that
about that the new corona virus came
from bats the initial contamination she
says likely happened here at a filthy
animal market in Wuhan China someone
there she believes butchered a bat came
into contact with its blood or urine and
then touched his or her mouth or nose
and answering the question of where code
19 came from does more than just give
you something to blame will also help
scientists address this and other
illnesses that make the jump from humans
to animals led get is an epidemiologist
and a molecular biologist at New York
University's School of global Public
Health and this happens to be her
specialty
so Elodie thanks for being here number
one but let's start off with how do we
know that it's actually the bats fault
well if you look at the genetic
information of the virus and that's what
we do when we sequence so their genetic
information has basically that's what
the genome of the virus has and this
indicates what the provenance is from so
the the genetic information is like a
barcode and if we compare other viruses
that have been collected in bats and the
SARS from 2003 was a bat virus also and
it's very similar to our current SARS
Coby and looking at these these viruses
and looking at their genetic information
is like looking at a family tree you can
trace who resembles whom and that's what
we're doing exactly with this with this
virus so they're able to look at the
virus in humans and trace it all the way
back and say this is where it started
tomorrow these animals in this case bats
that's right so if you compare that
information
it's basically so similar
that for that to happen randomly is
practically impossible so we know the
ancestor of the virus in humans had to
be about fires people always talk about
patient zero about trying to get back to
that first patient right had that switch
in a case like this is virtually
impossible to do but why is it important
to find out where it originated what
animal it started in okay so when you
look at what we call zoonotic
transmission so basically it's from an
animal to a human what you often want to
understand is what are the conditions
that really lead to that kind of
transmission so knowing where the virus
comes from is important from an
epidemiological standpoint it's you know
if it comes from bats could we prevent
such emergence by preventing the contact
of human and animal or Wildlife in this
case bats so it's important to know
where a virus comes from one of the big
questions I get from viewers is is this
mutating as this virus going to mutate
and we're gonna have to do something
like we do it's a flu or could it even
be more deadly is that something to be
scared of well a virus always mutates
just by nature viruses mutate quite
quickly and that's part of their
adaptation to their new hosts and so it
will mutate and it's very possible that
it'll be like flu where the mutations
will lead to new surface proteins and
that's what our immune system recognizes
or basically the proteins on the surface
of the virus and the virus it's possible
that corna virus will be like flu where
although now we're all susceptible and
we will eventually you know we suspect
maybe 70 to 80 percent of us will catch
it that means we will have some
resistance against that version of the
virus and it's possible that it becomes
a seasonal karna virus like we see in
the human population we have human
coronaviruses that come back every year
and it's possible that Tsarskoe v-- will
be becoming one of those seasonal
epidemics we just don't know at this
point and the vaccine would have to be
updated
every year just like the flu and up
until a couple weeks ago is called novel
coronavirus that novel meaning it's new
and so what you're saying is since it's
new and our bodies haven't found us
before we don't really have much
protection against it but that
protection might build up over time
correct that's right and that's what
happens with the flu all flu seasonal
flu that we see today were pandemics
decades ago so the 1918 flu that we
always talk about as the worst pandemic
we've seen in our in our history
actually is now a seasonal flu or became
a seasonal flu until we had another
pandemic in 2009 and this one also has
become a seasonal flu excellent so
hopefully it gets to that point where
this corona virus turns seasonal - and
and isn't affecting as many people as
fast but there's been a lot of
misinformation about corona virus on
social media NBC News reporter Brandi's
ad Rose knee took a look at what we
should watch out for now now the
platforms have really made inroads to
stop the spread of this dangerous
information and today I'm going to talk
to you specifically about what
Facebook's done they've made a lot of
inroads clamping down miss info on the
platform but one place that it's still
really thriving is in its groups
Facebook groups is a feature of the
platform where people can gather and
sort of talk about any topic really and
there are almost a hundred right now
coronavirus groups led by people that
are not doctors are not medical
professionals and aren't experts sort of
leading these discussions where that can
get dangerous is sometimes these groups
are called something like
coronavirus CDC updates but they have
nothing to do with the CDC and they're
really spreading hoaxes lies
misinformation and so you have to be
really careful about what kind of groups
you're following if you're following
these groups at all and and really
source out the information so it
searched for the corona virus on
Facebook brings up really reliable
information the problem is when you go
over to the tab that's groups its
coronavirus coronavirus coronavirus
warning watch corona virus updates
what's more dangerous about this too is
when we start looking at groups that are
known for spreading misinformation like
this one-stop mandatory vaccinations the
siz Facebook's largest anti vaccination
group and what it's done is it's really
left on this coronavirus misinformation
and conspiracy is to spread its own and
sell its products so if you just look
here you'll see all sorts of
misinformation about corona virus and
then changing it to be an anti
vaccination message so I do want to
leave you with one thing today and
that's how you can spot where a group is
coming from so this is the corona virus
official CDC updates group it is neither
official nor is it at all affiliated
with the CDC but how would you know that
so what you can do is go to this About
tab give it a click and then on your
right you'll see a tab that says history
if I just click on the see more
I can look through this tie through this
group's history and see that it changed
its name it was originally in 2018 when
it started Alexandria
Acacio Cortez for president 2020 it then
changed in 2019 to be hurricane during
an official NOAA updates and now it's
left on the coronavirus as the new it's
way to get followers gain clout so you
have to be really careful about where
these groups originated and that's a
really good tip to help you find out now
Facebook's been doing a lot to compact
coronavirus in this information on the
platform they're down ranking bad
information they're giving the w-h-o and
other public health organizations free
ads to spread their message and you just
recently they just they told me that
they're gonna stop recommending
coronavirus groups and the right
recommendation rail specifically
Facebook told me we're focused on
connecting people with accurate
information and removing harmful
misinformation related to kovin 19
including in groups anyone who searches
for kovat 19 related groups is directed
to credible information from health
organizations we already reduced the
distribution of any groups that
repeatedly share false news and in the
coming days we'll begin removing
coronavirus related groups and pages
from the recommendations we show people
and speaking of misinformation Elodie I
hesitate to talk about all the
conspiracy theories that are out there
but I know you can speak about the
genetic science that disproves a lot of
these that people are talking about
that's right I mean just look at the
genetic information and we know where
the virus comes from it does not come
from a lab one of the biggest theories I
hear one of the biggest conspiracy
theories I hear is that that BSL lab in
Wuhan China they're the ones that were
released it but you're saying that's not
necessarily true that that that we have
proof that that's not true correct I
mean we know when a when a virus has
been created in a lab there's like
information in the genome that tells you
how they constructed it and this is not
what this virus is we know where it
comes from and just real briefly here
you're being an epidemiologist and
molecular biologist how worried are you
about where we are right now as far as
the country as far as how we're prepared
for this and how we're dealing with it
I'm worried because we don't know where
the viruses we don't have enough tests
that have been done and so we're flying
blind and that's a scary scary during an
epidemic so it's coming down to the
testing and the testing when I tell
people often is a testing won't
necessarily help me if I know I have it
or don't have it but it's more of a
public health issue it's going to help
us know where to put our forces where to
concentrate our equipment and
concentrate the people and the health
care workers that's right and we we know
you know if you have it to social do
social distancing but also it will give
us better numbers of what is the real
prevalence and also the death rate
excellent so hopefully we get that all
under control because it's extremely
important I think we're just at the
beginning of this battle like a lot of
experts have said it's including doctor
foul cheek it's going to get worse
before it gets better but it will get
better so LD again and thank you again
for being here that does it for us this
hour remember a coronavirus crisis team
is closely tracking the story and
providing updates across all NBC News
platforms and of course the latest
information is available at nbcnews.com
slash coronavirus i want to thank
everybody for joining us this hour
NBC News now continues next
[Music]
you're watching NBC News now we've got
some breaking news this is the Lions got
laughing brought more to the caucuses
news made for your streaming world live
weekdays 3:00 to 11:00 p.m. Eastern
white terrorism and white supremacist
terrorism in this country he's not some
weird analog to al Qaeda or Isis it's
not some foreign thing that looks like
something that we've been fighting in
the war on terror it's actually
fundamentally as American as anything
and it is an existential threat to the
multiracial and pluralistic equal and
open democracy that we've been fighting
for in this country since people died on
the battlefield in a civil war
this is an NBC News special report
here's Lester volt good evening everyone
we're interrupting our regular
programming to bring you remarks from
President Trump on the corona virus
outbreak now a pandemic